README.rst, before:

|PyPI license| |PyPI version| |JOSS status|

.. |PyPI version| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/taxonomy-resolver.svg?label=PyPI%20version&color=blue
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/taxonomy-resolver/

.. |PyPI license| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/taxonomy-resolver.svg?label=License&color=blue
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/taxonomy-resolver/

.. |JOSS status| image:: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/f4753608becbcdb391b48ee95f389400/status.svg
   :target: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/f4753608becbcdb391b48ee95f389400

#################
Taxonomy Resolver
#################

Taxonomy Resolver builds an NCBI Taxonomy Tree structure based on the `NCBI Taxonomy`_ Database classification. Taxonomy Resolver can be used to validate Taxonomy Identifiers (TaxIDs) against the Tree or to generate lists of TaxIDs, based on some TaxID of interest (e.g. higher-level rank (node) in the tree).

The main features of Taxonomy Resolver are:

1. Downloading taxonomy dump files from the `NCBI ftp server`_
2. Building an NCBI Taxonomy Tree data structure based on the NCBI Taxonomy classification
3. Writing and loading the Tree structure in ``pickle`` format
4. Building a slimmer "filtered" Tree (based on a list of TaxIDs) to improve performance
5. Quick lookup to see if a TaxID exists in the Tree (i.e. is valid)
6. Generate lists of all children TaxIDs that compose a particular Node (sub-tree)
7. Generate lists of children TaxIDs based on a list of included and excluded TaxIDs (included and excluded sub-trees)
8. Filtering the resulting list of children TaxIDs, for example to cleanup TaxIDs that are not observed in a dataset of interest

Taxonomy Resolver initially builds a tree hierarchy structure resulting in deeply nested dictionaries. To retrieve a full tree or a sub-tree, a lot of iteration takes place, following the path from the node of interest down the hierarchy. This approach does not scale well, especially for very large trees. Thus, in Taxonomy Resolver, the tree is represented following a different approach, commonly referred to as the Nested Set Model. In the Nested Set Model, we can look at a tree hierarchy differently, not as connected nodes, but as nested containers. The nested set model is a particular technique for representing nested sets in relational databases, which we implement here in a pandas ``DataFrame``. For that, the full tree is traversed with Modified Preorder Tree Traversal strategy. In a preorder traversal, the root node is visited first, then recursively a preorder traversal of the left sub-tree, followed by a recursive preorder traversal of the right subtree, in order, until every node has been visited. The modified strategy allows us to capture the 'left' and 'right' (``lft`` and ``rgt``, respectively) boundaries of each nested container. Querying and searching is much faster with this approach because finding a subtree is as simple as filtering/searching for the nodes where ``lft > Node's lft`` and ``rgt < Node's rgt``. Likewise, find the full path to a node is as simple as filtering/searching for the nodes where ``lft < Node's lft`` and ``rgt > Node's rgt``.

Both traversal markup (left and right), depth and node indexes are captured for each node in the tree. The following Taxonomy Tree is used as a test mock tree - see `nodes_mock.dmp`_:

.. image:: testdata/mock_tree_diagram_50.png

The resulting tree can be represented in tabular form:

+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| index | tax_id | parent_id | rank   | depth | lft | rgt |
+=======+========+===========+========+=======+=====+=====+
| 1     | 1      | 1         | root   | 1     | 1   | 58  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 2     | 2      | 1         | rank 2 | 2     | 2   | 57  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 3     | 3      | 2         | rank 3 | 3     | 3   | 28  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 4     | 5      | 3         | rank 4 | 4     | 4   | 21  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 5     | 10     | 5         | rank 5 | 5     | 5   | 8   |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 6     | 19     | 10        | rank 6 | 6     | 6   | 7   |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 7     | 11     | 5         | rank 5 | 5     | 9   | 10  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 8     | 12     | 5         | rank 5 | 5     | 11  | 20  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 9     | 20     | 12        | rank 6 | 6     | 12  | 13  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 10    | 21     | 12        | rank 6 | 6     | 14  | 19  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 11    | 25     | 21        | rank 7 | 7     | 15  | 16  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 12    | 26     | 21        | rank 7 | 7     | 17  | 18  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 13    | 6      | 3         | rank 4 | 4     | 22  | 23  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 14    | 7      | 3         | rank 4 | 4     | 24  | 27  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 15    | 13     | 7         | rank 5 | 5     | 25  | 26  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 16    | 4      | 2         | rank 3 | 3     | 29  | 56  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 17    | 8      | 4         | rank 4 | 4     | 30  | 39  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 18    | 14     | 8         | rank 5 | 5     | 31  | 36  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 19    | 22     | 14        | rank 6 | 6     | 32  | 33  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 20    | 23     | 14        | rank 6 | 6     | 34  | 35  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 21    | 15     | 8         | rank 5 | 5     | 37  | 38  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 22    | 9      | 4         | rank 4 | 4     | 40  | 55  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 23    | 16     | 9         | rank 5 | 5     | 41  | 42  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 24    | 17     | 9         | rank 5 | 5     | 43  | 44  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 25    | 18     | 9         | rank 5 | 5     | 45  | 54  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 26    | 24     | 18        | rank 6 | 6     | 46  | 53  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 27    | 27     | 24        | rank 7 | 7     | 47  | 52  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 28    | 28     | 27        | rank 8 | 8     | 48  | 49  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 29    | 29     | 27        | rank 8 | 8     | 50  | 51  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+


------------

.. contents:: **Table of Contents**
   :depth: 3


Dependencies and Installation
=============================

Installation requires `Python`_ 3.10+ (recommended version 3.11). Additional requirements, which will be downloaded and installed automatically. See full list of dependencies in `requirements.txt`_

Python Environment
------------------

Dependencies for the Python tools developed here, are the typical Python stack (3.10+ and pip). A good approach is to set a virtual environment:

.. code-block:: bash

  virtualenv -p `which python` env
  source ./env/bin/activate
  pip install --upgrade -r requirements.txt
  pip freeze > requirements_from_freeze.txt
  deactivate

Installing
----------

``Taxonomy Resolver`` can be installed with pip:

.. code-block:: bash

  pip install taxonomy-resolver


Getting Started
===============

Taxonomy Resolver can be used as a Python module or via the CLI provided.

Module
------

Example of typical usage of the Taxonomy Resolver module is provided below:

.. code-block:: python

  from taxonomyresolver import TaxonResolver

  resolver = TaxonResolver()

  # Download the NCBI Taxonomy Data Dump
  dumpfile = "taxdmp.zip"
  resolver.download(dumpfile, "zip")

  # Building the NCBI Taxonomy Tree data structure
  resolver.build(dumpfile)

  # Saving the Tree data structure as Pickle format
  treefile = "tree.pickle"
  resolver.write(treefile, "pickle")

  # Get a list of children TaxIDs that compose a set of TaxIDs
  searchfile = "taxids_search.txt"
  tax_ids = resolver.search(searchfile)

  # Write the TaxIDs to a file
  taxidsfile = "taxids_list.txt"
  with open(outfile, "w") as outfile:
      outfile.write("\n".join(tax_ids))


When a Taxonomy Tree is already available one can simply load it with ``resolver.load()``:

.. code-block:: python

  from taxonomyresolver import TaxonResolver

  resolver = TaxonResolver()

  # Loading the NCBI Taxonomy Tree
  treefile = "tree.pickle"
  resolver.load(treefile, "pickle")

  # Validate a set of TaxIDs against the Tree data structure
  validatefile = "taxids_validate.txt"
  valid = resolver.validate(validatefile)
  if valid:
    print(f"TaxIDs in {validatefile} are valid!")

CLI
---

Explore the CLI by running ``taxonomy-resolver (COMMAND) --help``

.. code-block:: bash

  Usage: taxonomy-resolver [OPTIONS] COMMAND1 [ARGS]... [COMMAND2
                              [ARGS]...]...

    Taxonomy Resolver: Build a NCBI Taxonomy Tree, validate and search TaxIDs.

  Options:
    --version   Show the version and exit.
    -h, --help  Show this message and exit.

  Commands:
    build     Build a NCBI Taxonomy Tree data structure.
    download  Download the NCBI Taxonomy dump file ('taxdmp.zip').
    search    Searches a Tree data structure and writes a list of TaxIDs.
    validate  Validates a list of TaxIDs against a Tree data structure.


Additional help is provided for each command, for example, running ``taxonomy-resolver (command) --help``, returns:

.. code-block:: bash

  Usage: taxonomy-resolver search [OPTIONS]

    Searches a Tree data structure and writes a list of TaxIDs.

  Options:
    -in, --infile TEXT             Path to input NCBI BLAST dump or a prebuilt tree file, (currently: 'pickle').  [required]
    -out, --outfile TEXT           Path to output file.
    -inf, --informat TEXT          Input format (currently: 'pickle').
    -taxid, --taxid TEXT           Comma-separated TaxIDs or pass multiple values. Output to STDOUT by default, unless an output file is provided.
    -taxids, --taxidinclude TEXT   Path to Taxonomy id list file used to search the Tree.
    -taxidexc, --taxidexc TEXT     Comma-separated TaxIDs or pass multiple values.
    -taxidse, --taxidexclude TEXT  Path to Taxonomy id list file excluded from the search.
    -taxidsf, --taxidfilter TEXT   Path to Taxonomy id list file used to filter the search.
    -ignore, --ignoreinvalid       Ignores invalid TaxIDs.
    -level, --log_level TEXT       Log level to use. Expects: 'DEBUG', 'INFO', 'WARN', 'ERROR', and 'CRITICAL'.
    -l, --log_output TEXT          File name to be used to writing logging.
    --quiet                        Disables logging.
    -sep, --sep TEXT               String Separator to use.
    -indx, --indx INTEGER          String positional index to use (starts with 0).
    -h, --help                     Show this message and exit

Getting the NCBI Taxonomy Data from the `NCBI ftp server`_:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver download -out taxdmp.zip


Building a Tree structure from the ``taxdmp.zip`` file and saving it in the ``pickle`` format:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver build -in taxdmp.zip -out tree.pickle

Filtering an existing Tree structure in ``pickle`` format by passing a file containing a list of TaxIDs, and saving it in ``pickle`` format:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver build -in tree.pickle -inf pickle -out tree_filtered.pickle -outf pickle -taxidsf testdata/taxids_filter.txt

Load a previously built Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format and generating a list of TaxIDs that compose the hierarchy based on list of TaxIDs:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxids testdata/taxids_search.txt

Load a previously built Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format and generating a list of TaxIDs (included TaxIDs), exclude TaxIDs from the search (excluded TaxIDs), and filter the final result to only those TaxIDs that are available in the list of filter TaxIDs (filtered TaxIDs):

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxids testdata/taxids_search.txt -taxidse testdata/taxids_exclude.txt -taxidsf testdata/taxids_filter.txt -out taxids_list.txt


Validating a list of TaxIDs against a Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver validate -in tree.pickle -taxids testdata/taxids_validate.txt


Load a previously built Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format and search for one or more TaxIDs (for example human, TaxID '9606'). Included, excluded and filter lists can be optionally passed as shown above.

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxid "9606" -out testdata/taxids_human.txt

Writing the 'complete' human sub-tree (i.e. all levels of the hierarchy) in ``newick`` format can be done via the build command and passing a TaxID filter file, which can be generated by running the search command shown previously.
 
.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver build -in tree.pickle -inf pickle -taxidsf testdata/taxids_human.txt -out testdata/taxids_human.nwk -outf newick

Alternatively, ``newick`` output can be generated for the 'local' human sub-tree (i.e. species and sub-species levels only), directly using the search command, as shown below:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxid "9606" -out testdata/taxids_human_local.nwk -outf newick


Contributing
============

See `CONTRIBUTING.rst`_ for more information about contributing to Taxonomy Resolver.

Bug Tracking
============

If you find any bugs or issues please log them in the `issue tracker`_.

Changelog
=========

See release notes on `CHANGELOG.rst`_

Acknowledgments
===============

I would like to thank Adrian Tivey for insightful discussions.

License
=======
The European Bioinformatics Institute - `EMBL-EBI`_, is an Intergovernmental Organization which, as part of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory family, focuses on research and services in bioinformatics.

Apache License 2.0. See `license`_ for details.

.. links
.. _license: LICENSE
.. _issue tracker: ../../issues
.. _requirements.txt: requirements.txt
.. _Python: https://www.python.org/
.. _NCBI Taxonomy: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy
.. _NCBI ftp server: https://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/
.. _CHANGELOG.rst: CHANGELOG.rst
.. _CONTRIBUTING.rst: CONTRIBUTING.rst
.. _nodes_mock.dmp: testdata/nodes_mock.dmp
.. _EMBL-EBI: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/

Commit message:

docs: noting newick as an output

README.rst, after:

|PyPI license| |PyPI version| |JOSS status|

.. |PyPI version| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/taxonomy-resolver.svg?label=PyPI%20version&color=blue
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/taxonomy-resolver/

.. |PyPI license| image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/taxonomy-resolver.svg?label=License&color=blue
   :target: https://pypi.org/project/taxonomy-resolver/

.. |JOSS status| image:: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/f4753608becbcdb391b48ee95f389400/status.svg
   :target: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/f4753608becbcdb391b48ee95f389400

#################
Taxonomy Resolver
#################

Taxonomy Resolver builds an NCBI Taxonomy Tree structure based on the `NCBI Taxonomy`_ Database classification. Taxonomy Resolver can be used to validate Taxonomy Identifiers (TaxIDs) against the Tree or to generate lists of TaxIDs, based on some TaxID of interest (e.g. higher-level rank (node) in the tree).

The main features of Taxonomy Resolver are:

1. Downloading taxonomy dump files from the `NCBI ftp server`_
2. Building an NCBI Taxonomy Tree data structure based on the NCBI Taxonomy classification
3. Writing and loading the Tree structure in ``pickle`` format
4. Building a slimmer "filtered" Tree (based on a list of TaxIDs) to improve performance
5. Quick lookup to see if a TaxID exists in the Tree (i.e. is valid)
6. Generate lists of all children TaxIDs that compose a particular Node (sub-tree)
7. Generate lists of children TaxIDs based on a list of included and excluded TaxIDs (included and excluded sub-trees)
8. Filtering the resulting list of children TaxIDs, for example to cleanup TaxIDs that are not observed in a dataset of interest
9. Generating trees in ``newick`` format using the `build` or `search` commands

Taxonomy Resolver initially builds a tree hierarchy structure resulting in deeply nested dictionaries. To retrieve a full tree or a sub-tree, a lot of iteration takes place, following the path from the node of interest down the hierarchy. This approach does not scale well, especially for very large trees. Thus, in Taxonomy Resolver, the tree is represented following a different approach, commonly referred to as the Nested Set Model. In the Nested Set Model, we can look at a tree hierarchy differently, not as connected nodes, but as nested containers. The nested set model is a particular technique for representing nested sets in relational databases, which we implement here in a pandas ``DataFrame``. For that, the full tree is traversed with Modified Preorder Tree Traversal strategy. In a preorder traversal, the root node is visited first, then recursively a preorder traversal of the left sub-tree, followed by a recursive preorder traversal of the right subtree, in order, until every node has been visited. The modified strategy allows us to capture the 'left' and 'right' (``lft`` and ``rgt``, respectively) boundaries of each nested container. Querying and searching is much faster with this approach because finding a subtree is as simple as filtering/searching for the nodes where ``lft > Node's lft`` and ``rgt < Node's rgt``. Likewise, find the full path to a node is as simple as filtering/searching for the nodes where ``lft < Node's lft`` and ``rgt > Node's rgt``.

Both traversal markup (left and right), depth and node indexes are captured for each node in the tree. The following Taxonomy Tree is used as a test mock tree - see `nodes_mock.dmp`_:

.. image:: testdata/mock_tree_diagram_50.png

The resulting tree can be represented in tabular form:

+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| index | tax_id | parent_id | rank   | depth | lft | rgt |
+=======+========+===========+========+=======+=====+=====+
| 1     | 1      | 1         | root   | 1     | 1   | 58  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 2     | 2      | 1         | rank 2 | 2     | 2   | 57  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 3     | 3      | 2         | rank 3 | 3     | 3   | 28  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 4     | 5      | 3         | rank 4 | 4     | 4   | 21  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 5     | 10     | 5         | rank 5 | 5     | 5   | 8   |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 6     | 19     | 10        | rank 6 | 6     | 6   | 7   |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 7     | 11     | 5         | rank 5 | 5     | 9   | 10  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 8     | 12     | 5         | rank 5 | 5     | 11  | 20  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 9     | 20     | 12        | rank 6 | 6     | 12  | 13  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 10    | 21     | 12        | rank 6 | 6     | 14  | 19  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 11    | 25     | 21        | rank 7 | 7     | 15  | 16  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 12    | 26     | 21        | rank 7 | 7     | 17  | 18  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 13    | 6      | 3         | rank 4 | 4     | 22  | 23  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 14    | 7      | 3         | rank 4 | 4     | 24  | 27  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 15    | 13     | 7         | rank 5 | 5     | 25  | 26  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 16    | 4      | 2         | rank 3 | 3     | 29  | 56  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 17    | 8      | 4         | rank 4 | 4     | 30  | 39  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 18    | 14     | 8         | rank 5 | 5     | 31  | 36  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 19    | 22     | 14        | rank 6 | 6     | 32  | 33  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 20    | 23     | 14        | rank 6 | 6     | 34  | 35  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 21    | 15     | 8         | rank 5 | 5     | 37  | 38  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 22    | 9      | 4         | rank 4 | 4     | 40  | 55  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 23    | 16     | 9         | rank 5 | 5     | 41  | 42  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 24    | 17     | 9         | rank 5 | 5     | 43  | 44  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 25    | 18     | 9         | rank 5 | 5     | 45  | 54  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 26    | 24     | 18        | rank 6 | 6     | 46  | 53  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 27    | 27     | 24        | rank 7 | 7     | 47  | 52  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 28    | 28     | 27        | rank 8 | 8     | 48  | 49  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+
| 29    | 29     | 27        | rank 8 | 8     | 50  | 51  |
+-------+--------+-----------+--------+-------+-----+-----+


------------

.. contents:: **Table of Contents**
   :depth: 3


Dependencies and Installation
=============================

Installation requires `Python`_ 3.10+ (recommended version 3.11). Additional requirements, which will be downloaded and installed automatically. See full list of dependencies in `requirements.txt`_

Python Environment
------------------

Dependencies for the Python tools developed here, are the typical Python stack (3.10+ and pip). A good approach is to set a virtual environment:

.. code-block:: bash

  virtualenv -p `which python` env
  source ./env/bin/activate
  pip install --upgrade -r requirements.txt
  pip freeze > requirements_from_freeze.txt
  deactivate

Installing
----------

``Taxonomy Resolver`` can be installed with pip:

.. code-block:: bash

  pip install taxonomy-resolver


Getting Started
===============

Taxonomy Resolver can be used as a Python module or via the CLI provided.

Module
------

Example of typical usage of the Taxonomy Resolver module is provided below:

.. code-block:: python

  from taxonomyresolver import TaxonResolver

  resolver = TaxonResolver()

  # Download the NCBI Taxonomy Data Dump
  dumpfile = "taxdmp.zip"
  resolver.download(dumpfile, "zip")

  # Building the NCBI Taxonomy Tree data structure
  resolver.build(dumpfile)

  # Saving the Tree data structure as Pickle format
  treefile = "tree.pickle"
  resolver.write(treefile, "pickle")

  # Get a list of children TaxIDs that compose a set of TaxIDs
  searchfile = "taxids_search.txt"
  tax_ids = resolver.search(searchfile)

  # Write the TaxIDs to a file
  taxidsfile = "taxids_list.txt"
  with open(outfile, "w") as outfile:
      outfile.write("\n".join(tax_ids))


When a Taxonomy Tree is already available one can simply load it with ``resolver.load()``:

.. code-block:: python

  from taxonomyresolver import TaxonResolver

  resolver = TaxonResolver()

  # Loading the NCBI Taxonomy Tree
  treefile = "tree.pickle"
  resolver.load(treefile, "pickle")

  # Validate a set of TaxIDs against the Tree data structure
  validatefile = "taxids_validate.txt"
  valid = resolver.validate(validatefile)
  if valid:
    print(f"TaxIDs in {validatefile} are valid!")

CLI
---

Explore the CLI by running ``taxonomy-resolver (COMMAND) --help``

.. code-block:: bash

  Usage: taxonomy-resolver [OPTIONS] COMMAND1 [ARGS]... [COMMAND2
                              [ARGS]...]...

    Taxonomy Resolver: Build a NCBI Taxonomy Tree, validate and search TaxIDs.

  Options:
    --version   Show the version and exit.
    -h, --help  Show this message and exit.

  Commands:
    build     Build a NCBI Taxonomy Tree data structure.
    download  Download the NCBI Taxonomy dump file ('taxdmp.zip').
    search    Searches a Tree data structure and writes a list of TaxIDs.
    validate  Validates a list of TaxIDs against a Tree data structure.


Additional help is provided for each command, for example, running ``taxonomy-resolver (command) --help``, returns:

.. code-block:: bash

  Usage: taxonomy-resolver search [OPTIONS]

    Searches a Tree data structure and writes a list of TaxIDs.

  Options:
    -in, --infile TEXT             Path to input NCBI BLAST dump or a prebuilt tree file, (currently: 'pickle').  [required]
    -out, --outfile TEXT           Path to output file.
    -inf, --informat TEXT          Input format (currently: 'pickle').
    -outf, --outformat TEXT        Input format (currently: 'txt' or 'newick').
    -taxid, --taxid TEXT           Comma-separated TaxIDs or pass multiple values. Output to STDOUT by default, unless an output file is provided.
    -taxids, --taxidinclude TEXT   Path to Taxonomy id list file used to search the Tree.
    -taxidexc, --taxidexc TEXT     Comma-separated TaxIDs or pass multiple values.
    -taxidse, --taxidexclude TEXT  Path to Taxonomy id list file excluded from the search.
    -taxidsf, --taxidfilter TEXT   Path to Taxonomy id list file used to filter the search.
    -ignore, --ignoreinvalid       Ignores invalid TaxIDs.
    -level, --log_level TEXT       Log level to use. Expects: 'DEBUG', 'INFO', 'WARN', 'ERROR', and 'CRITICAL'.
    -l, --log_output TEXT          File name to be used to writing logging.
    --quiet                        Disables logging.
    -sep, --sep TEXT               String Separator to use.
    -indx, --indx INTEGER          String positional index to use (starts with 0).
    -h, --help                     Show this message and exit

Getting the NCBI Taxonomy Data from the `NCBI ftp server`_:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver download -out taxdmp.zip


Building a Tree structure from the ``taxdmp.zip`` file and saving it in the ``pickle`` format:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver build -in taxdmp.zip -out tree.pickle

Filtering an existing Tree structure in ``pickle`` format by passing a file containing a list of TaxIDs, and saving it in ``pickle`` format:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver build -in tree.pickle -inf pickle -out tree_filtered.pickle -outf pickle -taxidsf testdata/taxids_filter.txt

Load a previously built Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format and generating a list of TaxIDs that compose the hierarchy based on list of TaxIDs:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxids testdata/taxids_search.txt

Load a previously built Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format and generating a list of TaxIDs (included TaxIDs), exclude TaxIDs from the search (excluded TaxIDs), and filter the final result to only those TaxIDs that are available in the list of filter TaxIDs (filtered TaxIDs):

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxids testdata/taxids_search.txt -taxidse testdata/taxids_exclude.txt -taxidsf testdata/taxids_filter.txt -out taxids_list.txt


Validating a list of TaxIDs against a Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver validate -in tree.pickle -taxids testdata/taxids_validate.txt


Load a previously built Tree data structure in ``pickle`` format and search for one or more TaxIDs (for example human, TaxID '9606'). Included, excluded and filter lists can be optionally passed as shown above.

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxid "9606" -out testdata/taxids_human.txt

Writing the 'complete' human sub-tree (i.e. all levels of the hierarchy) in ``newick`` format can be done via the build command and passing a TaxID filter file, which can be generated by running the search command shown previously.
 
.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver build -in tree.pickle -inf pickle -taxidsf testdata/taxids_human.txt -out testdata/taxids_human.nwk -outf newick

Alternatively, ``newick`` output can be generated for the 'local' human sub-tree (i.e. species and sub-species levels only), directly using the search command, as shown below:

.. code-block:: bash

  taxonomy-resolver search -in tree.pickle -taxid "9606" -out testdata/taxids_human_local.nwk -outf newick


Contributing
============

See `CONTRIBUTING.rst`_ for more information about contributing to Taxonomy Resolver.

Bug Tracking
============

If you find any bugs or issues please log them in the `issue tracker`_.

Changelog
=========

See release notes on `CHANGELOG.rst`_

Acknowledgments
===============

I would like to thank Adrian Tivey for insightful discussions.

License
=======
The European Bioinformatics Institute - `EMBL-EBI`_, is an Intergovernmental Organization which, as part of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory family, focuses on research and services in bioinformatics.

Apache License 2.0. See `license`_ for details.

.. links
.. _license: LICENSE
.. _issue tracker: ../../issues
.. _requirements.txt: requirements.txt
.. _Python: https://www.python.org/
.. _NCBI Taxonomy: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy
.. _NCBI ftp server: https://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/
.. _CHANGELOG.rst: CHANGELOG.rst
.. _CONTRIBUTING.rst: CONTRIBUTING.rst
.. _nodes_mock.dmp: testdata/nodes_mock.dmp
.. _EMBL-EBI: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/
